enough light that you could read the lettering on
my white phosphorus rockets. I don't know if you
know about white phosphorus, but it burns
without, I mean, you can put it in water. It can even
burn to taste the oxygen in the water. They're used
for marking rounds. You weren't supposed to
engage the enemy with it. And you could also see my
fuel vent dripping fuel right by this burning
canister. And so I told the Air Force Stinger
gunship, that I picked up one of his flares on my
wing and I was going to go back to the LZ. And it was
about a 15 minute flight back to the LZ. So I turned
left. I could only do left hand turns. Turn left,
head back to the LZ, and called and told him to get
out the crash truck. And all this time I'd
forgotten about the Vietnamese in the backseat.
He was the littlest one we had, little tiny guy. And
I looked over my shoulder to see how he was doing,
and I said, pretty exciting, huh? This guy had not
undone the metal clamp holding the fire
extinguisher. He had ripped it out. Found out
later he had actually ripped this metal clamp out.
Had this little baby fire extinguisher, and he was
holding it as if he could spray out the window of
this fire, which he couldn't. And you've heard the
expression, people shaking like a leaf. This
man's entire body was violently shaking. I've
never seen anybody more scared in my life. So I
figured he wasn't going to be much help. And I went
back to the LZ, and the LZ, the landing strip, is
built up on the edge of a 200-foot cliff. And as I was
heading on final into the wind, I started to lose
altitude, and I had full power in. And I'm losing
altitude, and my rate of descent is taking me into
the face of the cliff. And that's, of course, not
acceptable. So I thought I would, if I had to, I
would turn off to the left into the ocean. Because
if I turn to the right, I'm hitting another cliff.
Which meant I had to land at night, going away from
shore, on the water's surface, with no flotation
equipment, wearing steel-soled and towed combat
boots, a pistol, a canteen, a survival vest, two
bandoliers of ammunition. Not only do I not have
any flotation gear, but I'm responsible for the
guy in the back seat. So I thought I would do that as a
last resort. I'd see if I could clear the edge of the
cliff. And for some reason, and I don't know how, I
got a little bit of a boost at the end, and I just
barely cleared some tangle foot barbed wire at the
edge of the cliff, and a bunker, and a road, and I
landed on the overrun of the runway. And so the next
day, my crew chiefs gave me a party. I got a plaque at
home that had a little piece of the player sheet on
it that they gave me. I bet that guy didn't fly with
you anymore. Oh, yeah. But he was scared. We had
another guy take a few rounds one day, and he took
one round that shattered a pulley for his rudder
controls and went through the rudder, the metal
rudder itself, and lodged it in his boot. It didn't
hit him, but it stuck in his boot. And the next day,
he was due to go out on a mission. We had so many
missions we needed to get additional pilots in, so
he'd come from another platoon. And he was late
getting out of the aircraft, and we went into the
hangar to find him. He was in the alert shack, lying
on a cot, turning blue, having a convulsion. He was
so scared. And so he was relieved we sent him back.
And I can understand, you know. Bobby Beale flew
the next day after he got shot down. Bobby Beale was
the guy that crashed and played in the bicycle with
me and almost had the mid-air in the bicycle. And
then our last day in process, or out processing, we
were flying from Quignon back to Camron. We
stopped at the train for lunch. Again, he's flying
in the front seat and I'm sitting in the back and he
almost hit a C-130. Bobby almost killed me three
times. But he's a big guy. Do you feel that the
communication was effective enough and also
honest from the United States government to
everyone in Vietnam? Do you feel that they were
hiding some information from you? Oh, I think they
were. I think Johnson did, and I think Nixon did. I
flew for, I can't remember how long, two, three
weeks. where I couldn't fire, even have fired upon
without calling for clearance. And clearance
came through Vietnamese sources.
And nobody ever told us why. It was a stupid rule. It
was stupid. If you're getting shot at and you can't
shoot back, we shot back. You know, we called for
clearance, but we'd go ahead and shoot. If they
came back and said, you have clearance, we'd say,
thank you. If they came back and said, you don't
have clearance, we'd say, thank you. We'd already
fired anyway. One incident which made me hate the
Vietnamese all the more, when I worked with the
first of the 50th Mechanized, I'd do what is called
recon by fire, and they were going to sweep an area,
and they're in tanks, I mean, you're not going to
surprise anybody. What we wanted to do was break up
ambushes and mines. So I'd fire artillery into the
bush ahead of them and set off secondary
explosions where the mines were. Shut off the...
Anyway, they were sweeping an area that had not
been swept in a long time. It was surrounded by open
country, but it was a couple mile long, mile wide,
real thick area. And somebody decided they needed
to sweep it. So I called for the usual clearance to
recon by fire with artillery ahead of them. And the
request was denied. from sector, and sector was
the Vietnamese control of the province. I thought
that was sort of unusual, but they normally ask for
me when they do these sweeps. So I flew over them for
four hours. Four hours was the limit of my fuel.
And this area was so thick that they had to dismount
from the tanks and go by foot. So I was relieved on
station by another aircraft and went back to
refuel And while I was on the ground refueling, the
word came that they'd been hit by a bunch of mines.
They started walking into mines, and they had
about 20 guys injured from mines. I don't think
anybody died, but they were torn up pretty bad. So
they sent helicopters out to pick up the wounded
and brought them back, and the little clinic was
right behind my hangar. and they unloaded the
dust-offs right there outside of my hangar. I had
to help carry the wounded in. And I'm convinced
that somebody at sector knew that place was mine,
and that's why I didn't get clearance to fire.
Also, have you seen the original movie, M.A.S.H.?
Not the movie, no. Okay, well, whoever did the
makeup for the casualties in that movie has been
there. Because these guys are dirty and they're
burned. And
once you see somebody that's been hit by a mine or
stepped on a mine, you
don't forget it. What do you think or what was one of
the biggest mistakes you think we made? We made
giving them sanctuary. imposing artificial
rules. When we first started bombing the North,
the Joint Chiefs gave Johnson a list of 500 targets
that they said should be hit within the first two
weeks, no later than the first six weeks. Johnson
and his policy of gradual escalation, some of
those targets never got hit. Most of them didn't
get hit for years. He picked targets that were
ineffectual, that had no military significance.
They blew up bushes again. We could, in other
words, at the time we flew in the north, not me, but
U.S. pilots, they could not shoot the enemy planes
on the ground. They had to be in the air before we
could shoot them down or blow up the planes. Now, is
that stupid or what? You know, we couldn't put
ground troops in the north. Here you're fighting
an enemy that's got ground troops in your area that
you can't go into theirs, excuse me. Just
absolutely inane, insane, idiotic policies. And
we could have done a much better job. Who was
primarily responsible? Was that Johnson saying?
Johnson refused to even have audience with
Wheeler and other people from the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. He totally ignored their advice. Totally
ignored their advice. Was that because he didn't
really want to call it a war to the United States? I
don't know why it was. I'm not inside the man's
mind. Rumor control has it that through hidden
assets, he had holdings in Bell Helicopter and
Sealand Transportation. And Sealand
Transportation may not mean anything to you, but
if you saw the container ships coming in,
Sealand... made a ton of money on this war. So if in
fact, and this is only speculation, but if in fact
he had financial interest in these companies and
was therefore prolonging the war,
well, if you believe what goes around comes
around, he's getting what comes around now. What
did you think that the Kennedy administration did
as far as engaging us in it? Well, they were
idealistic. They were not real practical.
Eisenhower tried to keep us out of Vietnam. He
advised us against going into Vietnam and refused
to get us involved when he was in office. Kennedy,
feeling that we could take on the world, got us
involved with advisors, started the buildup.
Johnson completed the buildup. Johnson thought
he could have a war to boost the economy. and have a
war on poverty at the same time. And he was
mistaken. He was mistaken in many things that he
did. His history also shows, in my opinion, that he
was not what you call an honest politician, and
therefore I put nothing past the man.
If you read the book Thud Ridge, it talks about the
flights in the north to real Iowa.
But I fault Johnson for a lot of this. Like I said, by
the time Nixon got there, all he could do was try and
get us out the best way possible. Communists
understand power.
Who was it? Was it Lenin or Ho Chi Minh? I think it was
Lenin who said, political power comes from the
barrel of a gun. They understand power. Whenever
we bombed the North, they came to the negotiating
table. When we stopped, They'd stop. It was the
bombing that got them to sign that stupid truce
that they signed. False though it was. When
Eisenhower took office from Truman, the war in
Korea had been going on for a while and they'd been
negotiating and fighting back and forth. My
father was on a ship offshore Korea. It was a
communications center for communications to our
negotiators at Panmunjom. Eisenhower had been in
office a very short time, and he sent a message
through that communications center that my
father saw 200 negotiators saying, tell these
people that unless they sign a peace, that we'll
have a war like World War II. And they signed it like
that. Now, that's what they understand, and we
could have kicked them from here to China had we
been allowed to. And even when we didn't give The
sanctuary in North Vietnam, we gave them
sanctuary in China. They fly their planes. The
North Koreans flew their planes into China. The
Vietnamese flew theirs into China to protect
them, just like the Iraqis flew theirs into Iran.
We always give our enemies sanctuary somewhere.
So this war was, I don't know if this is correct, it
was different in a sense that our administration
was wishy-washy. Very much so. Would not say go in
and just get the enemy. What sanctuaries did we
give the Axis powers in World War II? None. We
started giving sanctuary in Korea because we were
afraid of widening the war. The popular saying is
you can't win a land war in Asia. Well, we don't
fight land wars anymore. We fight combined arms
wars. Right. And we
did them so much damage, and we lost Ted for 68 in the
press. We won it militarily, and that's a fact. And
I challenge anyone to dispute that. But yeah, we
could have won that battle. It was just stupidly,
stupidly fine. And that's the one thing, you know,
would I want my sons to fight in a wasteful war like
that? Well, no, I wouldn't. Would I advise them to
go if if they're called upon. Yes, I would.
There are times that you stand on principle.
The people who went to Canada, I don't believe
stood on principle. They could have done
alternative service.
I think they were basically cowards. I heard
people say, you know, I'm not going to go to Vietnam
and get killed. Well, first of all, not everybody
went to Vietnam. Second of all, very relatively
few who went to Vietnam got killed. That was a
10-year war. We had 50,000 killed in 10 years.
That's 50,000 too many. One is too many. I believe
that. I also realize that we kill 50,000 a year on
the highways. So we've got to put it in
perspective. There were times when we were losing
a lot. The Life Magazine story, have you seen that?
Look in the library for the Life Magazine issue
that takes a week's casualties. People killed in a
specific week. They put in their name and their
picture. Now that'll get you. That'll get you. And
yeah, it was a waste, but And
I think the thing to do is to fight. Communism is not
dead. One of the people that's supporting Mandela
in South Africa is a communist. Some of the people
trying to take over in Russia are communists.
Communism is not dead. It is evil. Everybody jokes
at Reagan for calling it the evil empire. It is the
evil empire. They lie, cheat, steal, and kill as a
matter of policy. Our government has screwed up,
but theirs does it all the time as a matter of
policy. And we have got to continue to fight that.
So the idea then, you think... was absolutely
justified. It's just the means, the way the war was
fought. The way it was fought. See, Kennedy got a
little involved, too, in the politics. He got
involved in changing the people in power in
Vietnam.
The domino theory was, in fact, a valid theory,
whether it worked out in practice or not. There are
some people who tell you that it did or it didn't.
Definitely, had we not fought them as much as we
did, I think it probably would have. But
I don't think we prosecuted the war with the South
Vietnamese properly.
I'm not really qualified to speak on that. I think
we could have done better, but I don't know. Had I
been in the position of power, exactly what I would
have had to do differently. Anything else? No.